That is kind of an overview of what it
looks like to play with a reactive system,
but I think it'd be a lot more
fun if we just built one.
This is one of my favorite things
about it, because with magic,
people kind of call it magic,
it isn't necessarily that magical.
You can build a reactive system
in less than 50 lines of code.
I think it's actually easier to implement
a whole reactive system than implement
a promise.
Like people ask that on interview
questions, how to implement a promise.
We can kind of just go in and
build something very simple ourselves
to kind of appreciate how it works and
kind of demystify the magic, so to speak,
so that's what we're gonna go to next.
We're gonna build a basic
reactive library here.
Now, if you want you can
just follow along with me or
you can code it yourself as we go.
But I've just opened up solid's
playground and playground.solidjs.com and
cleared it, but you can do this in code
sandbox or any kind of code location.
We're just gonna build it quickly, we have
two files that I'm gonna use for this.
I'm gonna have a main file which is
essentially where we're going to test
runner basically our reactive library and
then have reactive,
which is where we're gonna
do our implementation.
So, I guess the first thing we
kind of need to do is we need to
create a signal, and
I'm going to where is it from?
Dot slash reactive.
And we haven't actually created this yet,
but
I'm just kind of preemptively creating
the interface that we want because
we're going to let's say, count set,
count equals create signal.
Let's set it to zero here,
we're just kind of recreating that example
I was kind of playing with earlier.
Let's see if we can get it to at first
just kind of console log account,
and we want this to be, I guess, zero.
And then if we set count to, I don't know,
counting by five for some reason, and
we console log it again,
then we should see five, right?
That's kind of our goal here, so
I'm gonna go into reactive here.
And we're gonna kind of flesh out
how we might create a signal, right?
So go function create the signal and
it's going to take some kind of value,
okay?
And we're actually gonna
export this function so
that it does, and we want it to,
Return an array I think, sorry.
Count is not a function, okay.
So I'm making some progress here,
and our array,
we need the ability to read and
to write essentially.
So, We're gonna implement those functions.
Actually I'm gonna do this right,
don't mind my style too much,
I'm being very kind of functional
programming approach here.
But, To start with,
we're just going to say when we read it,
we just read our value and
when we write it, We get a new value in.
What should I call this?
New value.
And then value equals new value.
Actually I'm gonna turn type
script off for a moment here.
This isn't a lesson on how to do
type script generics at this point.
But essentially,
this is probably where we might start for
looking at how to create
a signal cuz I'm actually
leveraging a little trick in
JavaScript called closures here.
The fact that this is the same variable
that gets returned in the function and
the fact that this gets assigned to
that exact same variable is why this
actually works.
But essentially, we have a read
function that reads a value [LAUGH],
we have a write function
that updates the value,
we return the array and
everything seems to be working now.
And if I look at my console down here,
I have a zero and a five and
just a sanity check, let's make
that a ten, and it's zero and ten.
So, this is where we'd probably start.
But as you can imagine,
this doesn't really do anything.
What we really wanna do is
maybe make our effect and
I'm just gonna kind of
stub this out again.
We want an effect to do
our console log now, so
we want createEffect and
it gets a function.
I'm just gonna use
an arrow function here and
it's going to console log
whatever the count is.
And in this case, the first time it runs,
we want the log 0.
And then after we set at ten, or
five or whatever a number is,
we're hoping that logs are valued, right?
Of course, createEffect doesn't exist.
So, this is where we gotta
do a little bit more work.
So, let's go back into here.
Create effect.
And our effect takes a function, okay.
So to do this,
we actually need to do a couple things.
First thing we need to do is
actually upgrade our signal.
Inside our signal,
we're going to add a subscription.
So, this I'm just gonna
call it subscriptions and
I'm just gonna use a set,
it's probably the easiest way to do it,
we just create a new set that's
gonna hold our subscriptions.
Under the hood,
it's like an event emitter or
a pub sub kind of mechanism
where there's subscribers.
And now, another thing that we're gonna
need to do here is I'm gonna set up
something, I'm gonna call it context,
but it's gonna be a global.
It's gonna be an array.
And this is gonna be important
in a minute because this is how
we actually can keep track
of what's currently running.
As I mentioned before, this is using
the runtime, and this isn't a compiler
anything, it's a runtime mechanism,
there is a bit of a runtime stack.
The trick here is when we read our value,
I'm gonna update this a little bit,
still gonna return our value, right?
But when we read our value, we're gonna
use that context to figure out if
there is something observing it,
let's call it observer, okay?
And we're gonna look at the context.
I'm gonna go and
we're gonna take context.length minus one,
we're gonna look at the top of this.
You can think of context as a stack,
you push things onto it,
pop things off the top.
We're gonna look at this context and
see if there's something there.
And if there is an observer,
then we need to
go subscriptions, add that observer.
Okay, and then let's see here.
On the right side, we're gonna do
a little bit extra work too here.
We're gonna update the value
first like we did before,
but then what we're gonna do is
we're going to kind of iterate over
our observers, so observer const.
Let's see here, Of our subscriptions.
There.
And, We haven't really talked about
what the observer looks like,
we'll get there in a minute,
but we're gonna notify them.
I'm gonna just call it execute for
this sake, but
we're gonna go through and
essentially the process is everyone
that's subscribed to the signal
when it's updated tell it
to rerun its function, so
that's what we're doing here.
And that's actually most of it for
the signal side.
On the effects side, we kind of have to
build out this kind of new structure.
So I'm gonna make a variable here,
I'm gonna call it an effect,
and it's gonna be an object,
and it's gonna implement that
execute function that we
just, Created.
And actually we're going to also run it
immediately or sorry, effect.execute.
So the first time we run our effect,
it's gonna run that function immediately.
And how I'm doing 29 lines of code,
okay, let's see how we're doing here.
Okay, so
what does an execute function look like?
We're gonna iterate on this
probably a couple times, but
the basics of it is we're going
to push ourselves onto the stack.
So we're gonna push our effect onto
the stack essentially, and then,
We are going to run the function, and
then we're going to pop
ourselves off of the stack.
And if you've been watching the console
you might notice this is actually already
working at this point.
So, let's look a bit of
what's going on here, but
essentially this is
the most basic version,
I think we have like
30 lines of code here.
But if we took our example here,
What's happening is we create our signal
and it returns our two functions, right?
And then the very first
thing that happens is
we call this effect function essentially,
we create our effect.
And the effect pushes itself onto
the stack at that point as we saw here,
it pushes itself onto the stack.
And then we get to our console log and
it goes to run and
it goes, actually I have to
call this count function first.
And it calls the count function from
here which is our read function and
it looks at that stack and
sees that effect.
And because it exists, it adds
the effect to its subscription list and
returns to value, and
then the console log finishes.
Then later, we set the new value to ten.
So when we write it to ten,
we update it, and then we go over
that list of subscriptions, which is
just one, and then we recall the effect.
>> Does that mean that this signal
registers itself on first read?
What if we ran write before read?
To word it better,
whatever calls read adds itself to
the subscriptions on the first call?
>> Yeah, I see the question.
The question is,
what if the effect doesn't exist or
nothing's listening at the beginning?
If I understand the question correctly,
in this case, and
then we can test it to find out.
If we set it to two intermediately,
what ends up happening through
this flow is that all we did is we
created the signal, go to read and
then we write it immediately.
And when we write it immediately,
it's gonna set the new value but
there's no observer.
So it doesn't do this for
loop and it just continues, so
it's almost like where we started.
And then when the effect
runs the very first time,
it just happens to read the latest value
which is the already updated value of two.
As you can see, because we're using
functions to do reads here with these long
living effects, there's no stale closures
or any of that kind of thing because
you always just get the latest
value when you call the function.